Just as the sun is the presence of God in our collective universe, you are the presence of God in your local universe. You are a light being in a universe of equal beings, each one is just as essential to the whole.

------------------------------
I believe I can put it in words now. Thought I'd share here.

The enlightened people find, realize, remember their substantial Unity with the Universe. They realize that they are, effectively, the Universe observing, interacting with itself, from an individuated point of view.

And, they rediscover the inherent Love that pervades it, that constitutes the very fabric of existence. The divine Love that is the energetic blood of reality itself. The unifying force, the harmonizing movement. It is very much what keeps the Universe together, much like the way love keeps anything together. There is a deep caring towards all things that is directly observable, should one put the intent towards it. A base value to all things, a profound unity in their disparate expression. An equality in all things, much like all parts of a circle are equal, yet distinct.

And so, the truly enlightened person, the bodhisattva, is the one who drops any other pretense and starts acting as the one that they truly are, that is, the Universe. They become an agent of the Universe, channels of the universal Love that pervades all, and they manifest it through their very being, their actions and behaviours and all other facets of their existence, in their own personal way. They are the unmasked, the transparent, because they have abandoned the illusion of separation and have embraced their embeddedness in the whole, acting in concert with the rest of the organism that is the Universe, much like a cell is a part of a human organism and acts in co-creation with the rest of the cells. They look as though they are one with Everything because everyone already is; they have just started properly living it; acting the part.

In order to do this, most have gone through deep unlearning of what constrained their conception of self as purely the ego, the body, the separated being, and in doing so, the have removed the clutter that was in the way of just accepting what already was, and permanently is. They are still an individuated consciousness, only they realize they are a viewpoint of the whole Universe, much like the eye is a viewpoint of the whole human being. They gradually learn what sits outside the usual consciousness, the human instrument consisting of body/mind/emotions, and improve their connections with those deeper parts of self. They act in concert with the Universe much like two hands work with each other to wash themselves; it becomes a natural act because there sits a base realization that there is, at the core, a single consciousness acting, and so it operates in perfect harmony with itself. And much like the two hands wash each other with movements that would be mindblowing when observed as uncoordinated, separate, unrehearsed actions, so does the person find everything arranged exactly as the moment demands.

They are not spared the difficulties of life, because that's part of the point. We are the vessels through which wisdom is acquired from experience, and new insights on Love are gained through application and contemplation. The Universe is a dynamic creature, continuously changing, and we are the vectors of that change, channeling the universal forces through the original individuality that we embody, shaping them into something new, something further.

We forget all this because we know that there is a need for unlearning before things can be learned anew, and in different ways, going in different directions. There is evil because of that ignorance, of that forgetting of our greater reality, and it exists because it allows us to potentiate and deepen our understanding of Love, of what it truly means to Love, much like we say that one thing is preaching, another is feeling what you believe in, and another still is acting coherently with it. 
The evil is allowed to exist because it's what allows people to act in deep Love, and in so doing, driving people to greater heights of Love. As the shadows deepen, the light is allowed to shine more starkly.

This of course makes more sense from the larger point of view that the Universe is a way of the One Creator to explore Itself and deepen the understanding of Itself, and in so doing, evolve. One could compare it to the worlds we build for the sake of stories, and how those stories help us realize things about ourselves that we didn't know before, by merit of this exploration into new existences, new paradigms, new ways of looking at things, new experiences.

