- Parroting done right (see: imaginary friends et al.) They can totally grow alive on their own
experiment with different ways of relating more and more spontaneously, let it just come out however it comes, even staring sessions and just lazing about together or interacting and not saying much, it's all helping, LOVE THEM, do new things spontaneously so you know that you're not doing anything by rote
LOVE THEM SO MUCH for tis the organizing and harmonizing force, and they'll be in sucha better position to grow when you provide sucha  clean and expanding foundation
SO basically starting with something that has been parroted for a while, or is being parroted, and the thing is that gradual release of control. As you release such control you may meet diminished results, but you have to endure and let them find ways to reach you anyway and come up with being themselves to you, and communicate properly and such
	It’s something that needs to be properly understood for best results.
	What happens with starting tulpas, especially of the newly created variety, is that they may not possess access to faculties like language or projecting a mindvoice or moving a mindscape body, or possession of the physical body, and so on and so forth. The two main alternatives here are bearing patience and waiting for them to figure it out by themselves, or offering them a hand in the matter. 

	Providing help with translating their thoughts into words is one way parroting works; moving their mindscape body for them is called puppeting, and there probably as many concepts of lending them your faculties in some practice or other as there are activities that your tulpa can do.
	It can be considered a dangerous venture because it can easily foster doubt towards the tulpa when applied liberally, giving rise to the “It feels like it’s me doing it” syndrome, which is completely justified because yes, you’re actively contributing to their actions, and you’d want to stop that eventually. 
	And stop that you will. At some point, you will have to revoke that help, and let them find their own legs. The parent has to let go of the bike, and let the kid on it experiment for themself, by themself. There might be some falls inbetween, and some time may pass, but success must be considered inevitable.

	More in general, a process might be put in place where the tulpa is allowed to progressively explore and discover the complexities, and the existing pathways, of a particular skill through decreasing help; for example, from just inhabiting the body as the host moves, to the tulpa giving inputs and the host acting them out, to the host starting a movement and the tulpa finishing it, while acknowledging and making use of the existing muscle memory, towards independent possession.

it happens with imaginary friends, some get the drive THE DRIVE to be more independent and they achieve it. The DRIVE is important (literally bending the universe to their will). They got to want it, they must be determined, they must break free from the grasp and it's gotta be on their own and you gotta give them the space to, and it's probably best in a coordinated manner. 
So what happens is, there's gotta be a source of ? fuel? energy? the consciousness. SO basically what happens is, eitheer another one provides (like soul, or sigils that are charged) or it's got to be recursing (drawing power to itself)
also rememeber to always meditate to Listen properly, really 
experiment etc. and make sure to enjoy
also that guide by Ephemeral (https://git.xeserv.us/xena/tulpaforce/src/Eph/feat/5-steps/site/guides/creation/ephemeral-five-steps.md)
and possibly other guides that do a similar thing, that is, approach parroting from the new perspective