Let's talk about fear.

Fear is an inevitable companion of our lives, more present than ever for many as of late.

Like a liquid, fear can take endless shapes; it can seep through most of any defenses, and it can fill whatever container of experience currently held.

Like water, it can exist in various forms; it also can sediment and solidify as dread, or it can become volatile, pressured gas and fill the room with anxiety.

It has also milder, less colorful forms, such as unsettlement, disturbance, or unease.

Fear is the main emotion associated with the Water element, in both alchemical systems (Eastern and Western).

It sits on an axis at the opposite end of curiosity, the attractor to fear's repulsor.

Both fear and curiosity are indispensable components of life, since life is motion, and motion intrinsically carries the notions of both moving towards something (curiosity) and away from something else (fear).

Water, on its whole, is the element of change-as-adaptation, and specifically, fear participates through being the internal signal for something that's strident in the present moment (like say, the closeness to a dangerous snake), and that must therefore be changed, or resolved.

The emotion of fear spans far beyond the realm of mere survival, for we encounter such a feeling in most emotional contexts, in events of life big and small. It is not purely a prerogative of the material body, or of its needs.

There's a widespread notion that fear is an extension of our tendencies to avoid pain and seek pleasure, but that's not quite right, since it's very common to avoid pleasure and seek pain instead, in various forms. There's something deeper going on.

Such a deeply universal emotion as fear relates to a higher concept, a more general structure, which is our innate motion towards HARMONY, and the converse of moving away from DISSONANCE.

The *concept* of harmony is likely as hard-wired in our consciousness as it gets. We intuitively work with resonance/harmony w/most of what we face in life, giving us an innate feel of what fits and what doesn't. Even our brains are resonance chambers of electrical signal waves.

There's to note, however, that dissonance (like most other things) is something not entirely subjective nor entirely objective; it is a concept that is common to us all, yet in slightly different ways for each.

Just as dissonance is perceived differently by different people, based on their tastes, histories, and information, so people fear things in different strengths and modalities.

Nowhere this dissonance model carries as intuitively as in music, eternally great metaphor for life.

In music it's immediate to tell when some note _doesn't belong_; it's something that comes instinctual to most of everyone, a deeply-rooted sense that something else should be there, an innate desire for it to be more harmonious than what came out.

Still, in a world without multiple takes, the obvious thing to do in the moment is to press onwards, trying to make the best of it, and use notes that bring that dissonance back into the fold of the harmony, that RESOLVE that particular foray and bring it back to the melody.

In both its more and less obvious manifestations, fear calls us to change something, specifically because it's "not quite right" right now. It has the same innate immediacy of dissonance, the same wired urgency of imbalance.

Dissonance is something nominally avoided in compositions, and yet without any of it one would eg. never step away from the C major chord. There's a need for at least some d. to move a song forward, just like there's a need to continuously unbalance oneself in order to walk.

In our perception, such dissonances are intrinsically *asking for a resolution*, and in providing it, that deviation is integrated into the woven melody, giving *meaning* to it and making it part of the ongoing, evolving tune.

It is such dissonances that provide dynamism to a song, providing a sense of striving towards something, which generates a corresponding inner emotional movement.

The degree to which this is visceral and immediate is one of the reasons why music is so universally powerful.

Greater dissonances require more artful recoveries to make sense, and similarly, some of greatest, most artful (physical) movements are very dynamic, which require wild shifts of balance to be performed.

Still, there is such a thing as too much of it; to live in fear is to live in a constant state of disharmony, ranging from the low drone of dread, the steady hum of unease, the flitting chords of nervousness, the promising crescendo of anxiety, to the loud cacophony of panic.

And yet, the everpresent theme with all these is that _desire that things would be different than they are now_, somehow more harmonious. All maintain the base characteristic of fear as an innate striving.

Suffering never stops asking for joy.
Pain never stops asking for pleasure.
Fear never stops asking for love.

Fear alerts to the entrance of entropy in life, of Chaos, which is a word of Greek origin, meaning "opening", for it is the primordial wound in the Void from whence all creation has sprung forth.

It is from the wound of Chaos that our Order has risen, and in the same way, it is only from imbalancing ourselves that we can find a new balance one step further ahead.

Fear is the deeply-rooted call for resolution, for evolving the tune, for stepping in to move the melody yet forward. For taking what happened and making something beautiful out of it anyways.

https://dev.goalcast.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Bob-Ross-Quote-2.jpg

A big problem with fear is that it is not perceived as this challenge to adapt, and thus evolve; rather, fear is often cause for arrest and avoidance, just like one could leave the piano seat the first time they played a wrong note.

It takes skill and practice to make something new and harmoniously pleasant out of life events, in the same way as J.S.Bach could (and did) come out with a composition starting from an arbitrary sequence of notes someone provided him.

In our modern culture, however, it is widespread practice to have a relatively fixed harmony/melody, and to stay very conservative wrt it, not deviating very much from that, never letting it evolve into something else.

Partly for this reason, it is very common to fear the unknown, since it is more difficult to make something new and unexpected fit into our old, ongoing harmony. Most are not used to having to rewrite their melody, and thus avoid events that challenge it.

More specifically, it's very possible to observe people fearing/being uncomfortable with/moving away from positive changes in their lives because they don't fit into the existing melody; instead, often they go for something more in tune with their preexisting, distorted harmony.

Taken the right way, fear is a powerful ally. It is a truthful call for change-as-adaptation, but not necessarily to conform; it would do no good to pile on dissonances after a bad note.

Instead, it is a strong signal to devote particular attention to the situation, because it requires such to be properly handled. In taking proper care (attention) we can artfully weave the deviation into the rest of the harmonious tapestry.

Fear is dispelled through consciousness precisely because fear *is* a direct call to higher consciousness, and to what can be done from such a vantage point.