---
layout: post
title: "On Being Yourself, and Paradise"
date: "2021-11-07"
---
# {{title}}

#### {{date}}

<br>

I thought I had moved past telling people to "Just be yourself" until I advised just that in so many words some time ago. The thing is, that I tried that because I understand that it's a valid point; it's just unhelpful when condensed into a pithy phrase or thereabouts. And I think it's time that I clarify what being yourself actually means.

## Heaven on Earth

Let's start with Paradise. Paradise as in that ideal state that we aspire to; its common mythos is of a place that we lost and that we long to return to.  
Paradise, as a word, has roots in the Avestan (old Iranian) language: *Pairidaēza* were the walls that were built around noble Persian gardens, and so *paradeisos* became the Greek word to describe those very walled gardens.

Which is an incredibly apt origin, since when we go investigate life, its optimal shape is exactly that of a rich and lively interior that is separated from the outside by a very clear barrier, like an animal's skin, a tree's bark, or a cell's membrane.

In its original sense, Paradise refers to the same exact structure - even the Garden of Eden itself is a walled garden - and this has profound alchemical meaning, since that is also the shape we, as persons, have to model ourselves around in order to conform optimally to life.

A walled garden is a structure that is strongly individuated and distinct from the outside, separated from it by walls that keep most things from going in or out, except through select channels and in a directed and orderly fashion.

It is an ecosystem in itself that is maintained functioning and vibrant through the select inputs from outside (like sunlight) and that offers select, valuable outputs (like the fresh game for the Persian nobles) without sacrificing its own integrity or livelihood.

A microbe for example works in that exact way: the cellular walls allow only very specific things to come in and out; while there's a steady flow of inputs (food, oxygen,... ) and outputs (byproducts, heat, carbon dyoxide...), it is all strictly regulated, and all of it is specifically done so as to maintain life. Any unwanted or unwarranted exchanges with the outside (such as bringing in toxins, or expelling cellular material) is a breach of integrity, and constitutes damage, and has to be dealt with accordingly.

This is a blueprint that all life follows, at multiple levels (eg. for a multicellular being, this is the working model both for the whole organism and for the single cells). A closely related concept is that of the *holarchy*, in which all life is made of <i>holons</i>, entities which are both meaningfully distinct from the whole, and as such individualized, but also well integrated into the whole, and part of greater structures (themselves holons).

In such a holarchy, each holon is a system in itself, and needs meaningful flow of both ins and outs in order to maintain its internal order, but it also has to defend this order from spurious outside influences so as to self-perpetuate.

At the root, this is also our own model of how we, as individuals, would function optimally; in order for us to live in paradise, *we have to be our own paradise*, our own walled garden. Which has interesting implications, since when we compare our average self-image to it, we notice several strong discrepancies: for many, their own garden resembles more an hapazard plant and stuff assortment, with lots of trash from the outside hanging around, and someone else giving directions; the walls are crumbled and letting unrestricted flows in and out, and a lot of chaos reigns. This is what a cell with a busted membrane would look like.

So how does a paradise-Self look like instead? We can break it down into several steps.

(These steps are arranged in an order that is purely dialectical, and not chronological. They happen together during the process of reestablishing an integral Self, in a way that this linear writing may struggle to convey.)

### Part One: The Garden

For one, the walled garden metaphor describes a notion of complete self-possession. The Self is extremely well-defined and distinct from the outside; the wall draws a very clear line between what's in and what's out.

This translates cleanly into the notion of Knowing Yourself: knowing what is you and knowing what is not. It's about knowing what makes you truly you, what is rightfully part of the garden and needs to be in, and what instead doesn't belong and needs to be out. And not just at the physical level, but on an emotional, mental and spiritual level as well. 

Are the reactions you have to things just something that you inherited from the people or the culture around you, or something that you actually had the time to figure out for yourself? Are the ideas and opinions you have on the most disparate subjects just something that someone once said and that you took for granted? Just something that a figure of authority said and that was repeated by you since? Or do all of those ideas of yours spring from direct, personal experience? (And if it's something that you never encountered or experienced in your life, why would you need to have an opinion on it?)

Are the dreams about your future just something that other people wished for themselves, or for you, and that you absorbed over time? Are the original goals you had when you were young just something that was quietly put aside, or even forgotten, without the faintest attempt at actually making them come true, just because someone else had other plans, and told you yours were unfeasible?

The outside is full of things that resembles the contents of our insides, but to an organism, most of everything that is outside of the membrane cannot be directly used. Instead, it is only through the process of digestion that anything that is more complex than the basics ingredients of life (such as air or water) can be broken down in order to be integrated into the system, and later used.

Digestion means that almost nothing is taken in and used whole, but rather it is broken down systemically into its constituent parts (the alchemical *solve*) and later rearranged into more personal and suitable forms (the alchemical *coagula*). Nothing is taken in at face value, but rather carefully dissected and reconstituted from its analyzed parts.

This is also how the process of learning happens - as opposed to memorization, where whole factoids are just taken in, in one solid block, without coming to understand what they <i>mean</i>, without being broken down into their parts, their ideas and concepts, so that they can be reassembled as part of a tapestry of greater, interconnected comprehension.

Learning requires things to be broken down into details and carefully looked at bit by bit, so that they can be put back together into a personal structure of understanding. Outside of this process, only meaningless rote memorization is possible.

There are also strong parallels in language, where the lexicon of digestion is very semantically close to that of learning, and we speak of such things as having to digest information, or being able to stomach revelations.

In contrast to this, modern learning and Western culture in general requires of us to take in massive amounts of information without personal inquiry into the matters, without having to question their statements, without requiring the time and due diligence to break down each and every fact and coming to understand the singular bits.

Instead, Western life is full of "this is how so and so works" and "this is how things are" and "this is how the world functions". Unquestioned fact after unquestioned fact, one appeal to authority after another; all of which doesn't go without consequences, for an organism that does this not only fills itself with extraneous material that doesn't belong as-is, and which compromises the system's natural functioning; but this also severely weakens its digestive process by habit, which makes it less capable of actually breaking down new inputs meaningfully.

A person in the thrall of such a vicious cycle not only would be full of ideas and opinions that are not their own and were just borrowed from somewhere else; but would also find tremendous difficulty in coming to understand different points of view from their own; and maybe this sounds familiar for some of the readers.

The baseline integrity of the paradise-garden means that the Self must be entirely made of itself, and only itself; with nothing inside that came from the outside without being thoroughly broken down; and with nothing sitting outside that actually belongs inside.

The latter situation, of pieces of the inside that are outside, is of what we would call the dispossessed, or the fragmented; people who have lost touch with themselves enough that parts of them can be found on the outside, either lost or projected.

This is the people with forgotten dreams and aspirations, who bent over to serve a narrative not their own.  
This is the people with (Jungian) shadows that they cast on those around them, finding themselves in a hall of mirrors, where most of what they end up seeing and reacting to is the parts of themselves that they don't want to be dealing with.  
This is the people with severe trauma, which altered their course away from what they were wishing to be, from what they were growing into.  
This is the people with lost pieces of soul, as the shamanic terming goes; people who have lost parts of themselves, and that need meaningful reintegration to return to something closer to their original state.

Reestablishing this integrity is a careful double-duty work of taking back in what we are meant to be, plus dealing with what is extraneous inside ourselves by breaking down and digesting what we can of it, and throwing out both what we can't, and what doesn't serve us among what we actually digested.

These two processes can be called in many ways depending on the level described: on one hand, from recovering lost pieces of soul, to remembering who you are and what you want, reconnecting with your dreams, your emotions, your learning process, finding your groove, your place in life, and so on; and on the other hand, detoxification, trauma processing, deprogramming, and so on.

Self-possession includes the shedding off of the pretence of having to compare ourselves to others; other people can serve many roles in our journey, including being idols or inspirations, but targets of comparison is not one of those roles. Different people are not comparable except in the crudest of ways; each has their own path. The only meaningful way to judge yourself is by comparison to your past self, or to your own aspirations.

### Part Two: The Wall

The next part is repairing the wall. The wall is what keeps things from going in or out when they shouldn't, and allows things to go in or out when they should; it's what gives the system the stability it needs to self-perpetuate, and the selective flow that is required for maintaining the inner state of order. 

This can be broken down into four separate tasks:

- *Take in what needs to be taken in*. This includes all the things that the system truly requires for optimal functioning, including a healthy diet, good air, meaningful social interactions, satisfying activities, physical activity, sexual appeasement, spiritual fulfillment, and so on.  
Maslow's hierarchy of needs is called this way because each level of the pyramid is made of actual <i>needs</i> of ours that call out to be satisfied, and <i>being</i> happy (not just <i>feeling</i> happy) rests at the top of the pyramid.

- *Keep out what has to be kept out*. This means that heavy filtering has to be applied in order for what is not meant to us to not enter our system; this means deliberately abstaining from what will do ill to us, be it toxic food, or bad influences, or doomscrolling, or media that just looks forward to filling us with their own ideas, their product placements, their own ready-made conclusions on the world. It means keeping away from anything that would make us less of ourselves by poisoning ourselves (which means filling us with stuff that doesn't belong inside ourselves), or at least dealing with the source so that it doesn't do it anymore to ourselves.

- *Bring out what has to be brought out*. There's no inbreath without outbreath, and to live means to keep a steady flow both of inputs and outputs. This means to expel consumed air, and to shit out the byproducts of digestion and the cellular waste products, but it means so much more than that. It means to have an healthy emotional outflow; it means to have an healthy creative outflow. We are all called to express ourselves, and to express ourselves meaningfully, through the personal meaning that each of us holds within themselves. Each garden has their own fruits to share with the world, and to bring that bounty that is our innate gifts to the outside is as much a need of ours as is to eat or breathe. We die outside if we don't breathe, but we die inside if we don't express ourselves meaningfully.

- *Keep in what has to be kept in*. Just like our guts belong inside our body, and there's never a moment where that will not hold as long as we live, so it is with a plethora of things that will never not have to be private and personal. Our inner workings don't have spilled out for the world to see.

  > Let your workings remain a mystery.  
  > Just show people the results.  
  \- Tao Te Ching

  In the same way a magician would only spoil the trick when they explain it, so there are things inside ourselves that not only don't feel like they have to be shared or explained, but would actually detract from our collective experience if they were. Some things, some experiences of ours are so private, so personal, so individualized that they are not meant to be shared in any way; the sharing only diminishes them.

  The garden is something that communicates with the outside only by very selective means; the rest remains obscured by the wall. It is not something that others get to access, just like other organisms don't get to enter inside the cell membrane. The inner workings of another are not given to see or understand; only the outputs are what's given to elaborate on.

- The missteps on this process have to be dealt with promptly: the wall has to be repaired; what got out that was meant to stay inside has to be recovered if possible; and what has gotten in that doesn't belong inside has to be dealt with to the best of the system's ability. Eg. at the physical level, this is what the skin healing process and the immune system are for.

### Part Three: The Gardener

The third step is to step in as the rightful gardener of your own paradise, both to evolve the garden in the direction of a personal higher aspiration, and to keep up with the evolving demands of the system.

> "If you don't have a plan for what you want, then you will probably find yourself buying into someone else's plan and later find out that was not the direction you wanted to go. You've got to be the architect of your life." - Jim Rohn

It's far too common for me to see people following someone else's life checklist, endlessly chasing money, success or fame, or just struggling to get by in the way they were told how. People whose spirit is not at the helm of their ship, instead being remotely controlled by someone else's ideas or ideals. People say that's just how it works, that a life pursuing what we want is somehow wrong, but I think this is the most dissatisfied we've ever been as a species, and I believe things have to be reconsidered on this front.

There are many common regrets among the dying nowadays. [One of the most shared](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Top_Five_Regrets_of_the_Dying) is, "I wish I’d had the courage to live a life true to myself, not the life others expected of me."  
And there's no one else who can do the steering for you towards what you really want. Even if they did, [the story just isn't the same if the protagonist is asleep at the wheel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fLd8qkmdBd0). It loses meaning, and it becomes just a farce.  
We are *meant* to be in charge of ourselves, and to follow our deeper callings.

People get also turned away from the responsibility of directing their life because it's not a simple job, much less a static one. Change, as they say, is the only constant in life, and evolution is a process through which we undergo through time at many levels, including the personal and the cultural. A thriving garden is one that grows, and which requires different inputs (and gives different outputs) as it keeps up with the seasons, with the various stages of development, and the overall evolving composition of the garden itself. The responsibility for a garden requires observation, resilience, and adaptation, for it always develops.

It is always a moving forward; and like each step allows us to move yet one step further, each experience in life that we digest and internalize properly gives us the means to move further with our lives. Each satisfied question opens up more questions; each completed discovery opens up new avenues of exploration. Each lived experience gives us room and inspiration for more. Each new experience is a thread woven on the tapestry of our life, and each experience well lived builds up the pattern into something increasingly coherent and beautiful. While life is always our work of art, it is only from the integrity of our own walled garden that we can consciously coordinate and direct the process towards what truly appeases our own personal aesthetic, our own calling in life. 

Being yourself, being truly yourself, in your glorious fullness, is hard work. It's a life's work. But I don't think we came here to do anything else.

It is a seed's life-work to grow its innate potentials into a realized plant that is as full a manifestation of itself as it can manage, and I think it would be foolish to ask of a seed to grow into something it is not. In the very same way, I don't think there's anything to ask of people but to be themselves in the fullest way they can manage. Nature has worked itself out for billions of years, and has made a beautiful job of it. Mankind has also been part of it for several hundred thousand years, and it's worked out fine for most of these years; I have faith that it's possible for us to find a new equilibrium, that won't have us in the throes of this or that ideology, but that will just have everyone be themselves, as the fundamental directive of each of us.

Possessing our own paradise, in the sense of <i>owning</i> it, of being its actual and competent caretaker, is something that feels to me like it should be a baseline for the human being, in the same way people say that everyone should have the opportunity to pursue their dreams. It is a goal that I feel is quite distant for a majority of us, and that may be slipping away from many, but it remains something that I consider to be a fundamental human right, a fundamental goal of the individualized collective of humanity, and something that I'd wish more people would keep in mind to pursue relentlessly. I thought of helping by reminding people of its outline, so that it might be more easily recognized in each of our personal life experiences. And maybe to get a better clue when someone says you should just be yourself.
