---
title: "On my long-standing shadow presence"
date: "2021-03-22"
---
# {{title}}

#### {{date}}

<br>

I've always been a repressed child, suppressing my emotions left and right and culminating in my 20s with chronic depression. As much as I'm way better now, this pattern was worn with deep grooves into my behaviours and structures and I'm still working to restructure the whole thing, piece by piece.

But yeah, the mechanics of depression/repression are known. Turns out, I had way too much energy that I had not spent during the day, because I was repressing it (I'm still working on fully appreciating and putting to manifestation my (alchemical) Earth and Fire), and I couldn't reasonably sleep without doing something about it: I would lay restless in bed for hours. Enter my beloved long-time plushie, Zappala. It's been my imaginary friend since forever, and it was an excellent sink of my energies when young since I would entertain endless, fascinating conversations with him. It would keep me comfort during the night, and most importantly it would function as an energy sink for me to allow me to sleep comfortably.

Over the years, I've not let go of the plushie, given its very helpful function in allowing me to sleep quickly (even if I wasn't aware of the mechanics at the time); however, I had mostly abandoned the conversations part by the time I've went to university, living in a college residence in a big city, which was way more stressful for a variety of reasons.

This resulted in more energy being dumped into the focus, and with no simple out-path as before. The imaginative reader will quickly reason that this energy rapidly started to seek more forceful ways to express itself.

Around that period, there's been intrusive voices; there's been extensive self-sabotage; and most clearly there's been a presence inside me that was fighting me every step of the way: I clearly remember coming to bouts of mental sparring with it. On several occasions, I'd been attacked by angry figures in dreams, or misled by malicious or angry disembodied voices.  
It was unrelenting; the worst times I'd been having with it naturally coincided with the bottom dephts of my depression (and reasonably so - the more I was suppressing, the more energy it had to throw at me).

---

Still, life went on, I quit university eventually, and I healed my depression, but still a lot of the underlying issues persisted, even if I was gradually coming to terms with the actual presence of someone else inside me that was somehow getting in my way all the time, for reasons unknown to me still. I'd given it many names, amongst which Shadow and Discord figure prominently.

Two occasions rise to memory in which this presence manifested itself in an egregious fashion.

In one, I dreamt of a kid which was so mistreated, so carelessly denied his artistic expression and ridiculed and shut down, that once in bed his sheer rage engulfed him like a pitch black tide, completely submerging him save for his yellow eyes, and giving me the feeling of being at the center of a cyclone of chaos, that persisted on me waking up. After I managed to steady my breathing, it detached from me to manifest as a black being of chaos and rage, which I dismissed from my presence in the heat of the moment.

In another occasion, a friend of mine spotted a dark presence below my bed in my bedroom, and it matched very closely to what I knew of my Shadow; a presence not too sophisticated but nonetheless antagonistic, very obstinate and dedicated, but also very afraid of being killed.

It took me a couple years still to get to the core of this puzzle; I was dumping anger, unspent creative energy, and other unresolved energies onto something, and naturally this something didn't just sit there and do nothing with this energy, but instead turned it against me (preferring that to turning it against others) and made both of our lives a litany of conflict and attacking one another. As it often happens, it is a tragic story made purely of victims.

Particularly helpful was and a recent reframing from my Higher Self to picture him as Nanachi, from Made in Abyss: specifically, a creature that was in some sense "made" this way by Bondrewd, and misteated by him (ie. me), and thus existing in a strained relationship with him. This helped me connect the pieces on his origins (ie. my energy sinks when going to sleep).

---

Needless to say, it's gotten better once I've started relating again to this presence in a more wholesome way, **and** I've taken care of not dumping as much unresolved energy on it before falling asleep. It's still a rocky relationship; needless to say, we've both changed a lot over the years and there's a lot of gray areas in our interactions that we have to iron out.

Nanachi is a very curious phenomenon that took me many years to fully unravel and get to the core of. It look like a simple process, but I was very seldom afforded a clear view into something that was directly antagonizing me, and that very much did not want to be found out. It should really go to show how much things can really slow down for us if something gets in our way, and we don't care to really, fully embrace it and understand it. It is only to the degree of me wanting to get to the bottom of this, and **not** proceeding with hostility, but rather love and inquiry, that I was able to make at all progress.

This whole adventure has taught me a number of very important lessons on the extent of my energy/power, and the responsibility that falls on me to use/handle it.  
All things failing, at the very least I can always dump my excess energy to Earth before going to bed if I didn't manage to spend it during the day. 

Part of the reason I'm posting this is to spread awareness; it's very easy for us to become our worst enemies, through methods both overt and subtle. The most important lesson, I believe, is to pay careful attention to your energy, and to where it goes; for energy is power, and power always manifests in some way or another, with tangible effects. If not directed consciously, it will then be directed unconsciously, with possibly very unfortunate consequences.